feat: coding in local Visual Studio Code (#77)
eclipse-che/blog: _posts/2025-02-20-use-desctop-visual-studio-code.adoc

> ---

Reviewer: typo in the filename ^

Author: Done

> title: "Develop in local Visual Studio Code using Eclipse Che as a remote workspace"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Develop in local Visual Studio Code using Eclipse Che as a remote Cloud Development Environment"
```
with should use CDE term more often

layout: post
author: Vitaliy Gulyy
description: >-
   Use your local Visual Studio Code as an editor for a Che workspace
categories: []
keywords: ['Visual Studio Code', 'Eclipse Che editor']
slug: /@vgulyy/use-desktop-visual-studio-code
---

== Introduction

> Eclipse Che provides developers a web version of the of link:https://github.com/microsoft/vscode[Visual Studio Code OSS] editor, that includes all the features of the desktop version. But for developers, the transition to cloud development can be quite unusual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Che provides developers with a web version of the link:https://github.com/microsoft/vscode[Visual Studio Code OSS] editor, which includes most of the desktop version features. However, the transition to cloud development can be quite unusual for developers.
```

> With link:https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/command-line[Visual Studio Code Command Line Interface (CLI)] you can create a tunnel that alows you connect your familiar local Visual Studio Code to your workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With link:https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/command-line[Visual Studio Code Command Line Interface (CLI)] you can create a tunnel that allows you to connect your familiar local Visual Studio Code to your workspace.
```

> == Connecting Visual Studio Code desktop to a running workspace

Reviewer: I propose to swap places and start with `Connecting Visual Studio Code desktop to a new workspace`

Author: The order is changed

=== Prepare your local Visual Studio Code.

> The first, you need to install both link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-server[Remote - Tunnels] and link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-explorer[Remote Explorer] extensions to your local Visual Studio Code. It will allow you connect to a remote machine via a secure tunnel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you need to install both link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-server[Remote - Tunnels] and link:https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.remote-explorer[Remote Explorer] extensions to your local Visual Studio Code. It will allow you to connect to a remote machine via a secure tunnel.
```

=== Install Visual Studio Code CLI.

> Then you need to install Visual Studio Code CLI in your workspace. Open a terminal and run the following command to install Visual Studio Code CLI in the `/checode` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then you need to install Visual Studio Code CLI in your workspace. Open a terminal and run the following command to install Visual Studio Code CLI in the `/checode` directory.
```
In the future, I'm wondering if we can pre-install this CLI and bundle it with che-code?

Author: I managed to build CLI from sources, but it seems we have to pre-install the code-server as well. I haven't tried to build the code-server, so I can't say much about it.

[source, code]
----
curl 'https://code.visualstudio.com/sha/download?build=stable&os=cli-alpine-x64' --location -o /tmp/code.tar.gz && \
tar -xvzf /tmp/code.tar.gz --directory=/checode
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
If you don't have `gzip` installed in your workspace, you won't be able to install the CLI using the command above.

In this case you need to:

. link:https://code.visualstudio.com/Download[download CLI] for *Linux x64* architecture to your desktop

. unpack and upload the extracted binary to your workspace root

. move the binary to `/checode` directory and make it executable by `mv $PROJECT_SOURCE/code /checode && chmod +x /checode/code`
====

By placing the Visual Studio Code CLI binary in the `/checode` directory, we will preserve it if the workspace is restarted.

> === Create a secure tunnel to the workpace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Create a secure tunnel to the Cloud Development Environment.
```

> Open workpace terminal and launch the Visual Studio Code CLI with a command below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open workspace terminal and launch the Visual Studio Code CLI with the command below.
```

[source,code]
----
/checode/code tunnel --accept-server-license-terms --name $DEVWORKSPACE_NAME
----

Log in using your Microsoft or GitHub account.

image::/assets/img/use-desktop-visual-studio-code/cli-create-tunnel.png["Create a secure tunnel to the workpace"]

> After successful login, you will see the information about created tunnel and will be prompted to open the workspace in your browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After successful login, you will see the information about the created tunnel and will be prompted to open the workspace in your browser.
```

> === Open your workspace in local Visual Studio Code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Open your workspace using local Visual Studio Code.
```

> Open your local Visual Studio Code and navigate to *Remote Explorer* view. A tunnel to your workspace will appear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open your local Visual Studio Code and navigate to the *Remote Explorer* view. A tunnel to your workspace will appear.
```

With the buttons on the right, open your workspace in the current or a new window.

image::/assets/img/use-desktop-visual-studio-code/vscode-remote-explorer.png["Open your workspace in local Visual Studio Code"]
{nbsp} +

[NOTE]
====
A tunnel to your workspace will not appear if you are not signed in yet.
Sign in using the same account you used to create the tunnel.
====

== Connecting Visual Studio Code desktop to a new workspace

> You can connect your local Visual Studio Code to a new workpace in a click.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can connect your local Visual Studio Code to a new workpace with a few clicks.
```

First, create a workspace on the Che Dashboard and choose Visual Studio Code (desktop) as your editor.

image::/assets/img/use-desktop-visual-studio-code/select-editor.png["Create Workspace"]
{nbsp} +

Wait for the login page to appear and log in with your Microsoft or GitHub account.
Click the *Copy & Continue to Microsoft* or *Copy & Continue to GitHub* button to copy the authentication code to the clipboard and to open the authenticating pop-up.

image::/assets/img/use-desktop-visual-studio-code/login-with-provider.png["Login with GitHub account"]
{nbsp} +

> Complete the authentication process, paste in the code from the clipboard and follow the instructions. On successful authentication, close the pop-up and wait for the tunnel to your workspace to be created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complete the authentication process, paste in the code from the clipboard, and follow the instructions. On successful authentication, close the pop-up and wait for the tunnel to your workspace to be created.
```

image::/assets/img/use-desktop-visual-studio-code/open-visual-studio-code.png["Tunnel to the workspace"]
{nbsp} +

Click *Open in Visual Studio Code desktop* to open your workspace in the desktop version of Visual Studio Code. Confirm opening the desktop application by clicking Open Visual Studio Code - URL Handler.

image::/assets/img/use-desktop-visual-studio-code/confirm-opening-vscode-desktop.png["Open in Visual Studio Code desktop"]
{nbsp} +

Wait for the local Visual Studio Code and allow the *Remote - Tunnels* extension to open the URI.

[NOTE]
====

> If Visual Studio Code opens your workspace with a delay, open Remote Explorer view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If Visual Studio Code opens your workspace with a delay, open the *Remote Explorer* view.
```
